All right.
So,
265.
It feels weird celebrating 265, but I'll
tell you why I'm celebrating. The last
couple of weeks,
I did not perform very well. Lots on my
plate and just was very hard to focus.
And every time I tried to have a
deadlift session, it's just
wasn't feeling it. Anyway, so today,
um the reason why I wasn't feeling it is
because I've got a lot of work on. I run
a business and all those things. You
know, when you're focusing on work and
you try and lift heavy, it kind of I
don't know. For me, it just doesn't work
that well. So, when I train, I really
need to try and separate it as much as I
can, which is what I was able to do
today. Told everyone don't bother me. I
put my phone on silent, all of that
stuff, and I got the deadlift session in
because I kind of needed to feel
something heavyish. So, for me, the last
heavy session was 260. That was a small
progression. I wanted to make sure I got
a progression. Not sure what that looked
like to you, but for me, I feel like my
hand was a limiting factor. So, that
grip was like, "Oh, I was really holding
on for dear life there." So, I feel like
if I went any heavier, maybe I wouldn't
have gotten it. So, 265 was the correct
choice.
Now, that's my skill work. That's as
heavy as I'm going to go. I'm going to
do a whole bunch of additional posterior
chain strengthening exercises. And I'm
going to do um one, two, three, four
more four more exercises, which is a
lot, but I'm going to do only a couple
of sets, two sets on each of them.
Now,
the objective of today is a little bit
of rehabilitation. I'm still rehabbing
a spine injury. Uh I damaged my disc
pretty damn badly. Probably about three
or four months ago now. I don't know.
I've lost track.
But, I need to be conservative with the
rehabilitation. For the first 3 to 4
weeks, I did absolutely no spine loading
because I couldn't. I was in too much
pain. Standing for longer than a minute
put me like in a lot of pain. Down my
leg, the pain was down my leg. Anyway,
when that recovered, as soon as I could
at my earliest convenience, I got
straight back into strengthening my body
and moving as best as I could.
Uh and this is something that I've been
doing to limit how much I can lift is
I've taken on hook grip. So, hook grip
is uh harder for me, obviously. So,
that's going to be my limiting factor.
If I did a mixed grip, I'd be able to go
heavier, but I just don't trust my back
with heavier weights at the moment. 265
uh
you know, before my back injury, which I
injured from doing aggressive
stretching, before my back injury, I was
at about 310 kg for my deadlift. Uh so,
my strength is there, but I just don't
need to be lifting heavy. I don't want
to be in that type of pain anymore.
Uh so, what I'm doing is I'm taking my
time with my rehabilitation.
So,
the purpose of that is gradual exposure
to heavy weights. That is very gradual
cuz 2 weeks ago I did 260 kg or 3 weeks
ago. So, now 265 uh and I'm limited by
how much I can hold. Now, what I'm going
to do is the real work, which is still
going to be light. So, pause deficit
deadlifts. This is still in aid of got
I've got a lot of objectives that I want
to achieve. One, I'm a strength athlete.
I want to get stronger. And two, I
always want to build muscle. So, a lot
of people ask questions like, do you
prefer to train for muscle building or
strength building or what's the
difference between strength building and
muscle building? It's kind of like,
well, the more muscle you can build, the
better carryover that's going to have
for your strength. So, anyone who's
interested in building their top end
strength should focus on building muscle
as well.
Now, there's bodybuilders techniques in
building muscle, which is typically uh
you know, usually different choice of
exercises, you you more volume than a
strength athlete, more sets, more
isolation exercises, and higher rep
ranges. Strength athletes is a lot more
skill-based, so that deadlift
you know, one rep of a deadlift like
that of a conventional deadlift is it
effective for muscle building? Probably
not. Like one rep isn't enough volume to
build muscle. Does a deadlift build
muscle? Yeah, but it's very general. So,
a bodybuilder would want to do more
isolation exercises and target like
here's an exercise that targets glutes.
Here's an exercise that targets
hamstrings. A conventional deadlift is
very general hypertrophy.
Like it builds hamstrings, glutes,
erector spinae, traps. It builds a lot.
But bodybuilders want to be more
targeted with their selection with their
exercises when they're building muscle.
Either way, my focus is I want I want a
bit of both. So, therefore, I'm
splitting up my session into skill work
as well as muscle building work. So, the
first exercise of the day was the
conventional deadlift developing my hook
grip. Now, what I'm going to do is
paused deficit deadlifts. I think that's
going to have the most carryover of all
of the accessory exercises for my actual
deadlift.
Uh and the objective there is if you
notice on my conventional deadlift that
my hips rose early. That's always been a
bit of a problem for me. Uh and I would
say one of the reasons that it happened
especially today is focusing on my
hands. Uh I feel that the bar kind of
like drifted away from me because I'm
focusing on squeezing with my grip and I
lost my lats. Right? So, the idea of
lats is armpits to pelvis. And usually
when you lock your lats in, it allows
you to maximize the leg drive. But for
me, just then and as
I was focusing on my grip, it's like uh
hold on, hold on, hold on. I was kind of
forgetting about my lats and I lost my
lats, which forced the bar to kind of
shift forward, which forced my hips to
shoot up. Very slightly. Some of you
might notice, some of you might not have
noticed, but I definitely noticed. And
my favorite tool to help fix that is a
pause deficit deadlift. What I want to
do is focus on maximizing lat
recruitment. What the lats do is it
locks my torso in place so that I can
maximize leg drive. And then the pause
deficit deadlift also accentuates leg
drive. So that's the two biggest things
that I want to work on today. So, what I
like to do is after a top set, I just
did 265 kg.
Have a look at the bar.
What's on there? 120 kg. It seems silly.
And the reason why I'm emphasizing this
right now is a lot of people that I work
with, I do a top set like a heavy
deadlift, then when we do back down
work,
if it's a slightly different exercise, a
lot of people go, "Ah, so yeah, we're
going to go lighter. So let's just go
straight to the back down work." And
it's unfamiliar and it feels weird and
their first set sucks. And it's like,
"No, you've got it like you're warm, but
you got to get practice of that
movement. It's slightly different now.
Like your nervous system is a bit kind
of like relaxed at this stage." So right
now, I'm not psyched up. So, if I came
straight to my top set, it would feel
heavy. It would have felt terrible. So,
what I'm going to do now is just take my
time and feel the exercise. But what I'm
going to do is work to one or two sets
of a pause deficit deadlift, and then
I'm going to do a bunch of accessory
exercises to complement my entire
posterior chain for a successful
posterior chain session. So I don't want
to say it's a glute session, hamstring
session, it's all of that.
It's a deadlift session. All right.
Pause deficit deadlifts. The height of
the deadlift, it's up to you. I like
this height.
But I prescribe for a lot of my
high-level lifters uh a smaller deficit.
So like this is a a green plate, which
is usually like 1-in deficit.
The higher the deficit doesn't mean it's
going to make you stronger, just makes
you better at bigger deficit deadlifts,
right? So if all you do is big deficit
deadlifts, don't think you can do that
leading up to a competition and it's
going to directly carry over to, you
know, a one-rep max deadlift. You need
to practice the skill. So what I like to
do with a deficit, if you are going to
include deficits in your training, is
gradually decrease the thickness of that
deficit. So, further away from
competition, you could use a deficit
this size. And then, if I'm going to do
another phase, I'll reduce the deficit
to the 1-in the green plate. Uh and
then, as I get closer to competition,
I'll be doing no deficit. I'll be doing
pure specificity. But, either way, right
now, I like doing this. I'm not
competing. I just like long range of
motion. Yes, straps. No belt.
So, right now, the reason I'm using
straps is I'm not training my grip.
Okay.
Okay. So,
the whole idea here of a pause deficit
deadlift
is to teach myself to maintain tension
and take the slack out of the bar
without ripping it off the ground. So,
this is what I
experience a lot of my people that I
coach is they come in and they use a
grip and rip technique. They want to be
really, really aggressive. And I'll
introduce this exercise to force them to
slow it down and precisely take the
slack out of the bar before they drive
with their legs. That was pretty easy.
I'll be able to take big jumps now. I'll
go straight to 170. Ready?
Was it pretty?
Interesting. I wasn't really thinking
too much.
You know, that felt easier than the 120.
Isn't that funny?
That's what happens.
So, my advice, if you do like
main exercise such as a deadlift, and
you're going to do an accessory
variation of a deadlift after that,
obviously,
you won't be able to lift as heavy on
the right? So, you have to reduce the
weight. But,
always do a feel set. So, it's not as
though you need to warm up again. You're
already warm, but you need to
refamiliarize yourself with the
accessory exercise. And if you don't,
it's going to feel terrible. So, my
recommendation is actually
minimum one, but probably even two
feel sets where you go super light. You
drop the weight, you go super light,
practice in your movement, then go a
little bit heavier again for your last
warm-up, and then we go on. So, that's
what I'm going to be doing now.
220 for a single. Actually, that's going
to be my last warm-up. And that's going
to tell me what I'm going to do today
for my top set.
Oh, crap.
Let's do one set. So, this is the
second.
I forgot to press record. That's all
right.
You know, I only really show one, but
anyway, here's me doing First set I did
five
on 200.
I'm going to do two sets. So, the
objective here is two sets of every
exercise now. So, it's not a lot of
total exercises,
but
for me, this is where the discussion of,
you know, two sets is what you need.
This is what's trending at the moment.
Two top sets for exercise. It's kind of
been something that I've been doing for
a while, but
and preaching for a while, but
typically,
I only preach it for people at a higher
level.
Because
people at a high level know how to work
hard
and spend all of their energy to the
point where if you do more than two
sets, you know, the law of diminishing
returns applies.
And if you're doing so many more than
that many sets, so three sets and four
sets and five sets, when you're working
that hard, are you actually working that
hard at all?
It's kind of like a sprint versus a
marathon.
So, if you're able to Some people say
things like, you know, I do five sets on
this exercise and then five on the next
and five on the next or whatever it
might be, you know, and it's like 15 to
20 total sets in a session.
It's like, "Whoa, that's a lot. I don't
know how you have that much energy."
And it's like, "Well, yeah, cuz I'm a
hard worker or whatever." And then my
next question is typically, "How long
does it take you to get that session
done?"
And they'll say, "An hour." So, I'm
like, "No way. So, not only are you
doing that many sets,
but to get all that done, if you're
doing 20 sets in an hour, you're really
not resting that much in between those
sets, so you're not getting a full
recovery. If you're not getting a full
recovery,
your quality of your sets are not high.
So, whenever I write programs for people
and they say this is low volume, it's
like, "No, it's not low volume. It's the
right amount of volume for you at your
level." Now,
let me add context to this. If you're a
beginner, you don't know how to work
hard yet.
So, how do I explain this? Go and have a
look at the best bodybuilders in the
world taking their movements to failure.
Go and have a look at the look on their
face.
They're in a lot of pain. They are
working very, very hard.
Go and have a look at a beginner taking
the movement to failure. You're not
going to see that level of
execution on the exercise. They're not
pushing as hard. They may not be able to
perform more repetitions when they take
the movement to failure,
but that's mainly because they don't
know how to coordinate their body in a
way to do more repetitions.
So, therefore,
the more advanced you get, the better
you get at working hard. So, if you're
listening to this training advice of two
sets per exercises will suffice,
it may not apply to you if you're a
beginner. You might need a little bit
more practice of that.
So, I was just listening to
a podcast with Dorian Yates and Andrew
Huberman. And even Dorian Yates says it
because I know a lot of people are
emulating their favorite bodybuilder.
>> I could get certain movements to really
thrash the muscle that I needed to with
one or two sets. But, if there isn't
really good mind-muscle connection and
fiber recruitment, you might need a bit
more. It's possible, yeah. I mean, it's
none of this is written in stone. Our
objective is to get an exercise
and go to real muscular failure. We'll
need to get there safely, so we do a
couple of sets to warm up. But, if
somehow you don't feel or I don't feel
you nailed it in that set, let's do
another one. So, you are correct in
saying that somebody that's very
experienced, they got that mind-muscle
connection where you can just link in
and you can fully destroy it. So, it
depends on the person. But, the idea is
to not do more than is necessary because
then you're going to find it harder to
That's the Dorian Yates style, the Mike
Mentzer style where it's like
less sets, but high high high intensity,
high effort, quality over quantity, and
that's correct. But, even Dorian says
it. I was sitting there listening to
that advice thinking,
I know Dorian knows his stuff and he's
probably talking about his own training
when he says one or two sets will
suffice if you're working hard enough.
But, even he added context to it and
said, "If you're a beginner, we're not
counting that it's one set or two set or
three sets. You don't know how to work
hard yet. So, therefore, you haven't
earned the right to be able to only do
one or two sets. Beginners need a little
bit more volume
because they don't know how to spend
that amount of energy and that amount of
effort to stimulate
that type of a growth response, growth
in strength and growth in muscle. But,
the rule is
the more advanced you get,
the better you are at working hard. So,
therefore,
don't try and do these high volume sets.
Now, the next
caveat to that is that applies to
high-level lifters, people that have the
experience and have an understanding on
how to work hard. If you're a beginner,
you're not at that level yet where you
can take two sets to failure. I see a
lot of,
you know,
science-based lifters talking about
taking movements to failure. And I look
at them and it's like they'll do their
sets to failure.
They're not sweating. They're not really
working that I mean, they're trying as
hard as they can, but the expression on
their face, the color of their skin does
not look the same as
when you see Dorian Yates working on a
absolute max top set. Because they don't
know how to work that hard yet.
So,
for me, I feel like I've earned my
stripes. I've been training for over 20
years. And I know how to
work hard. And right now, for me, I did
the first set of five on 200, and now
I'm going to do my next set of five,
which I'm not taking to failure, by the
way.
So, different rules on fai- on training
to failure as well. Depends on the
exercise. With complex movements like a
deadlift, a squat, a bench press,
where it's skill-based,
you want to practice that skill with
good amounts of energy
and focus on technique. That's what's
important. So,
it's a different set of rules. I don't
recommend taking those movements to
failure. But, it doesn't mean you're not
working hard. So, I'm going to do
another set of five.
Yeah. Here's the first set.
Here's the first set of five. So, this
is me doing it and I'm just I'm going
over my technique. It looked all right.
You know, always room for improvement,
but I'm going to do another set of five
before I get cold.
And that'll be my second set of this
exercise. I'll make sure to record this
one.
Yeah, record it on that good camera so
I've got a, you know, I need to put the
compilation for the gram.
That self felt more comfortable than the
first.
Let me explain what I just did then. I
was setting my straps up, and then I
went to stand on top,
cuz I think that's what I advise a lot
of people.
Set up the straps, and then stand on
top.
But then when I did it just then,
I was bent over and I went to stand on
top, and it's like, "Oh,
my quads started cramping."
So, lesson learned. So, for me,
I have to strap up with my feet in
place.
But for some people who struggle bending
down, I recommend that they strap up
here
before they
set their feet in place.
But anyway,
two sets of five. No playing.
That's my compound stuff out of the way.
Does that build muscle? Of course. If
you do heavy deadlifts all the time,
you're going to build muscle. Where?
Well, in the deadlift muscles, of
course, which is all over your entire
body. Is that useful for a bodybuilder?
I think yes, but a bodybuilder getting
into competition prep, about to step on
stage, they want more isolated exercise
selection or muscle group selection,
hypertrophy selection. Whereas a
deadlift is more general hypertrophy.
I'm building bit of muscle in my
hammies, my glutes, my erector spinae,
my traps, bit of lats, I don't know,
everywhere. It does make you just
generally grow. But a bodybuilder
doesn't want to generally grow. They've
done their general growth in their early
years of training, and now they'll be at
a level where they're choosing exercises
for more targeted muscle growth, which
is why
a lot of the times the best advice is
not to go and look at your favorite
bodybuilder and look at the exercises
that they're doing and just copy them
blindly, because they are choosing those
exercises to work on whatever muscle
growth is specific to them at that time.
Whereas I'm certain that the best
bodybuilders in the world in their early
years did a lot more general hypertrophy
exercises, and a conventional deadlift
is perfect for that job. Same with big
squats and all of your big compound
movements. That's where you get most of
your muscle gain, your general muscle
gain. If you're a high-level
bodybuilder, you need that general size
before you start to refine, which
happens closer to competition.
So anyway, so right now that's my skill
component of my session, and
I'm probably
pretty fatigued. Not enough energy to do
more complex movements. So I'm going to
go and do some more isolated muscle
building exercises now, and I'm going to
show you some of my favorite exercises
to do. My next one is going to be a
snatch grip
back extension on a 45-degree back
extension. You call it back extension, I
call it hip extension. The action is hip
extension, but people call it
hyperextension, whatever you want to
call it. A hip extension
kind of typically targets the glutes and
the hamstrings
uh mainly in the fully contracted
position. The deadlift hits the ham hits
the glutes, not really very good for
hamstrings unless you do an RDL, where
it's a stiffer knee.
But a deadlift hits the glutes in a
stretch position.
A back extension hits the glutes in the
shortened position, so it's a really
nice complement. Another good complement
to that is a hip thrust.
So hip thrust, another exercise that
targets the glutes in the short
position. And today, I'm going to do
both of those exercises. You typically
say you don't need to do hip extensions,
or you know, 45° hip extensions and hip
thrust in the same session. That's
exercise redundancy, but I'm going to
explain where we can break the rules on
avoiding exercise redundancy. We need to
determine when we're performing our
exercises the limiting factor of the
movement. When I do my snatch grip back
extensions, I'm going to be doing a
pretty heavy weight.
And
I'd like to say that glutes are going to
be one of the target muscles. They are,
but it still doesn't target them
completely. It's going to be a lot of
emphasis on my upper back muscles and
teaching me to recruit the hell out of
my lats
for a deadlift. It has a great carryover
to the deadlift.
So, the way that I'm going to be doing
this exercise, it's going to be very
stimulating for muscle growth, but I
would say
more focus on upper back and and lats
and erector spinae, the way that I'm
holding a heavy weight.
Even though the glutes are the prime
movers in hip extension,
I typically walk away from that exercise
with my glutes
not the limiting factor of the movement.
So, therefore, I'm going to then add
more glute work afterwards, which is, as
I said, that's breaking the rules of
avoiding exercise redundancy,
but with a bit of logic behind it.
What's the limiting factor? People have
asked me questions and I say, "I feel
this exercise more in my hammies or more
in my glutes."
And something that I typically say is
all of those muscles are working, but it
depends on your strengths and
weaknesses. If you feel a 45° hip
extension more in your hamstrings, I'd
say of that chain of muscles, which is
hamstrings, glutes, and erector spinae,
your hamstrings are probably the
weakest, which is why you feel that
those muscles are working the hardest.
Some people feel the the the most and
I'd say
yeah, well, you should. Like, it's a
mainly a glute exercise.
But, if you feel one muscle over the
next of that chain, that's probably the
weak link, and therefore, it gets
targeted the most. So, if you feel that
the hamstrings are the weak link in this
exercise, would you say that you should
train it after?
Not necessarily, because if that's the
weakest, then that's the muscle that's
being prioritized in that movement.
Whatever muscle is a limiting factor of
the exercise is the muscle that gets
targeted the most. So, therefore, you
could say
if you do a back extension and your
hamstrings give way first, you could
even say that the glutes were left
under-stimulated, and maybe you should
do some additional glute work so that
you can choose an exercise
where the glutes are the limiting
factor, and that way you get adequate
stimulus on all of your muscles.
Things you do for a bit of presentation.
You know,
it's not that fatiguing. These machines
have wheels.
Which way should I face? Let's see.
Almost there.
That feels good.
That feels hard. When I say it feels
good, I mean, damn, that made me work
for it. Let me tell you.
Made me work for it. And what's the
limiting factor?
When I go heavy on this exercise, it's a
new addition, actually. Usually, I say
15 reps and plus is where I feel
adequate stimulus on this.
But, it's just a new feeling that I got
if you remember a few weeks ago I did a
set of six on that and it was like,
"Whoa!"
I can't explain
the exact muscle that felt like it did
the most work,
but it was different and I liked it. So,
I thought I'm going to give it a try.
So, I'll do two sets of eight on that.
My hamstrings are on. My glutes are on.
My back is on. But, I would say
holding on to that,
you probably saw me doing this. It's
like, "Oh!" I'm fighting to keep that in
place, which
I think is a really
important structure to be strong with
your deadlift
is your upper back.
That's how you lock your entire spine in
with lats, right?
So, the way that we lock our spine in
with lats, a lot of people
get it really confused with your
shoulder blade positioning with a
deadlift. And
if you get this wrong, it's too much
upper body work. You want to take your
upper body out of it, so you can lock
your torso in place
and just let your hips, your hip
extensors do the job, which means you
lock your torso in place and and that's
the action of a deadlift. Not this. So,
I teach people don't think pull, think
lock the torso in place and drive the
world away. So, that's the action.
How do you do that? With lats.
So, a lot of people say, you know,
retract the scapula. The problem is
when you retract the scapula, look at my
arm length.
I'm shortening my arms. I want to
shorten my arms in a bench press.
So, that's where I'll retract the
scapula. But, for a deadlift, you want I
want long arms. The longer the arms, the
more efficient the movement.
And the more you're going to take your
upper body out of the equation. So, how
do we engage our lats most effectively?
It's a weird thing. I'm telling you to
engage your lats so you can feel less
upper body
when it's precisely an upper body muscle
that you're activating. So, the way that
we activate lats
is two ways. Reach down.
So, reaching down and pulling back. So,
that's called shoulder joint extension.
It's an action of the lat. It does two
things. Engages the lats and it keeps
the barbell
close to your midline. And the barbell
needs to be with a heavy deadlift, it
needs to be
in the center of your base of support,
which is your midfoot. If the bar drifts
forward from that,
airplane.
The barbell needs to be
in line with the center of your base of
support, which is your midline.
If the bar drifts forward from that,
it's less efficient and it's going to
require more work. So, therefore, the
movement's going to be harder and at max
loads, that weight just won't come off
the ground. So, therefore,
the very muscle, the very action to keep
that bar in place is shoulder extension,
which is lats. So, that's why a cue that
I like to give is keep the bar in
contact with your shins.
And for beginners, I put shin pads on
like this and I'm not a beginner, but I
still have it.
And I like to use that as a cue and say,
"I want to hear the barbell sliding up
your shins."
Right? And that's how I can guarantee
your lats are on. That's a nice cue to
make sure that you can see that as well
or you can feel that your lats are on.
If the bar drifts away from your shins,
that tells me your lats are off. So, as
you get better and better, the bar won't
scrape on your shins as hard, but even
at the highest level, you see bleeding
shins with world record deadlifts. So,
that's how we engage the right muscles
of our upper body
to be as efficient as possible. Is reach
down and pull back. So, that's the
action of the lats and that's the
muscles that I would say is a limiting
factor of this snatch grip at 45° hip
extension. I'm I'm fighting with my
upper body. That's where I feel fatigue
the most, which I believe is going to
have a really nice carryover to my lat
recruitment in a deadlift. So, when
you're retracting in a deadlift, you
have to travel further
and you're fighting with your mid back
muscles to hold that bar in place.
That's weak. And when you get to a
certain point where it's too heavy for
those mid-back muscles, you're going to
get pulled out of position and that's
where your back starts rounding like a
fishing rod. Instead of retracting,
start with them out of position.
It's not really out of position. It's in
the correct position for a deadlift,
which is reach down, reach down for long
arms, and then pull back for for lats.
Reach down, pull back, and then from
here
crown the head to the ceiling. Now your
torso is locked in place and all you've
got to do is that. Boom, all right? Push
the world away. All right, next up hip
thrust. So this is where it's seemingly
a redundant choice of exercises because
this targets the glutes in the shortened
position, same like that 45° hip
extension that I just did. However, as I
mentioned, I don't feel that the glutes
were adequately stimulated with that low
rep range and heavy load. It was kind of
like a lot more muscles came into play
uh to finish that set of eight reps
on 100 kg snatch grip back extensions.
So eight reps is typically quite a low
rep range for me.
But it's a new stimulus. So it's not
saying that it can't be done. It's just
saying normally I feel more muscle
stimulation from a hypertrophy
standpoint when I'm doing an exercise
like that with a higher rep range, kind
of like minimum 12. But anyway, I'm
going to make up for it with a hip
thrust, which really targets the glutes
and therefore I'm going to do this
exercise with higher reps. So this is
the first set. It is a feel set.
I'm warm, but
Next set, I'll probably go for I don't
know, 15 or something like that. Add on
a little bit of weight and I'll do two
sets, two high rep sets
where the goal is for my glutes to feel
like they did all of the work, which I'm
sure they will.
>> That
you probably noticed the last few reps
were partial. I was not able to complete
the reps.
You know, I like the number 20 for that.
I hit 15, it's like, I can do more.
That's a movement where
it's worth taking to failure.
There's no complexity here.
There's no
risk of technical breakdown. Like, the
technical breakdown here is an
incomplete repetition.
No big deal.
So, this is where the rules of do you
train to fail or not
depends on the exercise. For a deadlift
high technical complexity. Don't take it
to fail. It's skill-based. You want to
refine the skill
with good technique. With here, it's not
skill-based. You're locked in a machine.
Of course, there's some technique. So,
the techniques that I'm doing here is
So, if you notice, I've got my chin down
to make sure that
my spine stays rigid and it's just
glutes doing the job. Rather than what
what some people do is they arch their
tail and tuck their tail. Or arch and
then piss up a wall. For me
I see a lot of debate going on at the
moment
on
I think that's called the scoop
technique.
I don't know whether you use that or
not. I don't really care. All I know is
I prefer to tuck the chin and keep
everything rigid and
have the glutes
doing one action, which is hip joint
extension. Not anterior tilt and
posterior tilt. One more set of that.
And I'm going to try and take that to
fail again, which is totally fine. The
next thing is like, if I take that to
fail, this is an exercise that it's not
going to negatively impact the
consecutive sets. Like on Of course, my
next set won't be the same quality. I
might be able to do, you know, one or
two reps less. No big deal. I don't want
that on those complex compound movements
like a the deadlift or the paused
deficit dead lifts. Take these exercises
to fail and you'll be totally fine. I'm
all set. Give me 5 minutes. That's the
next thing. I'm going to take at least 5
minutes. I'm going to take at least 5
minutes. Not because I need 5 Maybe I do
need 5 minutes. I've also got the time.
You know, a lot of people do things like
1 to 2 minute rest between sets. And I
look at that and it's like 1 to 2
minutes, if you're strong enough, I
don't care who you are, that's not
adequate recovery. You're not going to
be able to get the same quality on the
consecutive sets.
So, 1 to 2 minutes rest, I don't care
what the science says. I don't even care
what it is saying these days. All I know
is for me, damn, 5 minutes rest for
whenever I'm trying hard is still
borderline that's just enough. And when
I'm going for my big complex movements
like squat, bench press, dead lifts,
it's 8 minutes and sometimes
even longer if I'm really strong, which
right now, no, 8 minutes is good. But
for these accessory exercises, I like,
you know, 5 to 6 minutes.
Yeah, I'm going to do hamstring curls
after this.
So, that's going to finish everything
off.
Let me do one more set. I'll have a
drink. We'll do one more set. Last
exercise of the day. This is a very easy
exercise.
Uh how many exercises have I done? Dead
lift, paused deficit, snatch grip, hip
thrust, and hamstring curl. Man, I don't
need to, but, you know, overall that's
11 sets.
Cuz it'll be two on each and one for the
top set of the dead lift. Which do you
even count them as sets, you know? I
mean
Of course you can. I'm counting them as
sets. Whatever you count them as,
they're technique sets rather than, you
know, contributing to any meaningful
muscle hypertrophy. But, every single
one of these exercises is working on
something very slightly different. The
first two exercises were technique.
The snatch So, that's the dead lift
variation. Dead lift and snatch Dead
lift and paused deficit dead lift is is
technique and strength.
The next exercise is the 45° back
extension. That's pretty general for the
entire posterior chain. Hamstrings,
glutes, and erector spinae and upper
back in the shortened position. So,
hitting glutes in the shortened
position. The hip thrust is glute
isolation in the shortened position.
Now, this exercise targets all heads of
the hamstrings. This is a lying
hamstring curl. It targets all heads of
the hamstrings. So, how many heads of
the hamstrings? There's four. Three
muscles, but four heads. So, the muscles
are semimembranosus, semitendinosus.
That's the medial hamstrings and the
lateral hamstrings is the biceps
femoris. Biceps meaning two heads. So,
therefore, there's four heads. Now, of
those hamstrings, three of the four
heads cross the hip joint. So, whenever
I do my hip extension exercises,
three heads, so the long head of the
biceps and the semimembranosus,
semitendinosus are on, but the short
head of the biceps femoris doesn't cross
the hip joint. So, whenever you do hip
extension exercises, it's not active.
And if you want to strengthen the all
heads, we need to include some knee
flexion exercise, which is why it's
always a good idea to include some
hamstring curl variations.
So, the different variations are lying
and seated. I don't have a seated
hamstring curl, but objectively, the
seated hamstring curl targets the
hamstrings in a more lengthened
position. So, that is a slight
advantage, but at the same time, it's a
slight advantage. It's not a deal
breaker. I don't have that machine.
It's not a deal breaker that you don't
have that machine. A lying hamstring
machine is very good. The next
variations for that is things like
Nordic drops and glute ham raises, the
knee flexion component. Um
but yeah, hamstring curls. In every
exercise, if you want complete
hamstrings development, include some
knee flexion exercise. So, now this is
not counted. This is a feel set.
Now, I'll have 2 minutes because I
wasn't
working that hard. So, 2 minutes because
I don't need a complete recovery because
I'm not completely exhausted.
>> One more set.
If you notice my foot position here,
toes pointing down. Let me tell you a
little bit of a story about this. So,
toes pointing down, the objective here
is to take the gastrocnemius, which is
one of the calf muscles, out of the
equation. So, that's the big calf muscle
is responsible for plantarflexion of the
ankle, but also knee flexion cuz it
crosses that knee joint. So, it was a
trick that was taught to me by Charles
Poliquin. Point the toes down, that
takes the gastroc out of the equation to
allow you to completely isolate the
hamstrings.
So, nowadays, the modern-day
biomechanists are saying things like,
"If the muscle crosses a joint, it's
because it's there for a reason, and its
objective is to assist in that action.
When you take it out of the equation,
you're going against its natural
function. So, therefore,
point your toe up to increase the
tension on the gastrocnemius
so it can allow
a little bit of contribution from the
gastrocnemius."
Now, pros and cons of this.
It's less isolated, but if you point the
toes up and there's more contribution
from another muscle, it allows you to
lift a heavier weight. So, therefore,
same stimulus on the hamstrings.
Fair enough, right? Except now, for some
reason, whenever I point my toe up, for
some reason, it just cramps my calves
because I'm so unfamiliar with the
movement. For so many years, I did it
with my toes pointing down. So, it just
feels more comfortable for me to point
my toes down. Whenever I point them up,
it just feels like So, I'm not
doing it because I think that I'm trying
to isolate my hamstrings extra. I'm
doing it because that's the most
comfortable position for me.
So, I'm not going to take part in toes
down, toes up argument on whether or not
it's superior to do whichever way. For
me, I say whatever's the most
comfortable. Some people like to point
the toes out. They say it's more
um lateral hamstring, so that's biceps.
And toe pointing the toes in is more
medial hamstrings. For me, once again, I
don't care. I think that's nitpicking.
Um for some people it you might feel
like it makes a difference. For me, I
just say point the feet where it's the
most comfortable and
take that movement to fail. One more
set. And that's going to be my complete
session. That's a complete posterior
chain day.
Damn, that's everything. So, that's uh
yeah, hamstrings, glutes, and erector
spinae. That's complete posterior chain.
Whenever I do my deadlifts, there's
upper back muscles as well. So, that's
going to be lats and traps and so that's
a whole day. And you should follow this
program. I did two sets on everything.
Now, if you're a beginner, two sets to
fail on everything, don't take those big
compound movements to fail.
Exercise like hamstring curls and hip
thrusts and back extensions,
take them to fail. But two sets, because
that's the trend at the moment. It's the
low volume, which there's a lot of merit
to. Two top sets, that's adequate
stimulus. But if you're a beginner, you
don't know how to work that hard. So,
two sets, you may see inferior results.
So, therefore, if you're a beginner,
maybe consider doing an extra set.
A third set of everything. But as you
get more and more advanced, it's true.
The more advanced you get, the better
you are at working hard. So, therefore,
you don't need to do as much volume. You
should in fact reduce your volume as
well as increase the rest between sets.
So, a lot of people that listen to me
saying 5 minutes to 8 minutes rest
between sets are like, "Oh my goodness,
aren't you going to cool down?" If
you're strong enough, no, you're not. If
you're a beginner, resting 5 to 8
minutes is totally unnecessary. My
daughter, she's quite strong. Tiani, if
you've been following, she can squat 110
kg, 15 years old. Well, she's 16 now,
but she did it at 15.
At 52 kg body weight. So, that's more
than double body weight squat. She was
doing 5 minutes rest between sets, but
that's because she's quite strong. But,
all of her other exercises, it's, you
know, 3 to 4 minutes rest because that's
adequate recovery for the exercises that
she's doing. Anyway, hope you enjoyed
that session. Uh leave a comment, ask me
questions, whatever. If you've got any
special requests for any more topics
that you want me to discuss, leave it in
the comment section. Otherwise, I'm
going to see you next time. You know
what? Drop the ex- the whole program so
you can screenshot it. I'll do the exact
pro- I don't even know what I did. I do.
You'll just have to give me a moment,
but we're just going to post it right
here so you can take a screenshot of the
session.
And you can do the exact same session
and build a bulletproof posterior chain.
Weak back equals weak body.
You know, I'll tell you a funny story.
When I used to When I first got into
weight training, I used to go to the
beach and, you know, it's like I was
really skinny, so I was insecure to take
my T-shirt off at the beach. You know,
and you look at all these guys I'm in
Sydney, so the main beach was Bondi
Beach, and there's a lot of people that
get jacked for the summer, and you're
looking at these guys that are jacked.
They got big pecs and abs and biceps,
and those were the muscles that I used
to kind of like want to build. Those are
the mirror muscles. Uh but then as I got
further in my training journey and I
started favoring strength, I stopped
giving a about what people's pecs
and abs and biceps looked like. And if I
saw them turn around and saw weak
erector spinae, weak traps, and weak
glutes, I'd look at them and go, "Ah,
that guy's weak." You know? Uh so, now
that's what I consider to be the true
sign of strength is the posterior
muscles. If you got a strong posterior
chain, you've got a strong body, my dear
friend. If you have a weak posterior
chain,
you have a weak body. So, anyway,
go and get a strong posterior chain,
and you'll be strong.